Remove "baseline TLS" handshake reconstruction (#60)
tlswg/draft-ietf-tls-ctls: draft-ietf-tls-ctls.md

--- abstract

This document specifies a "compact" version of TLS and DTLS. It is

> equivalent to ordinary TLS, but saves space by trimming obsolete material,

Reviewer: Hopefully isomorphic is still fine.

Author: Changed to "logically isomorphic", as the "logical transcript" is the same, but there is no byte-conversion isomorphism due to the distinct Finished value.

is not necessary to have version negotiation and the
supported_versions extension can be omitted.

Each specialization produces a new protocol that preserves the security guarantees
of TLS, but has a unique handshake transcript.  This avoids any need to
reconstruct a "classic" TLS handshake, but it does not support implementation

> as a compression layer external to the TLS library.

Reviewer: I think we could remove this "compression" statement. It will  be confusing to future readers.

Author: OK, removed.

TLS 1.3 are highly optimized and do not require compression to be used.

The compression profile defining the use of algorithms, algorithm parameters, and
extensions is represented by the `CTLSTemplate` structure:

~~~~
enum {
  profile(0),
  version(1),
  cipher_suite(2),
  dh_group(3),
  signature_algorithm(4),
  random(5),
  mutual_auth(6),
  handshake_framing(7),
  client_hello_extensions(8),
  server_hello_extensions(9),
  encrypted_extensions(10),
  cert_request_extensions(11),
  known_certificates(12),
  finished_size(13),
  optional(65535)
} CTLSTemplateElementType;

struct {
  CTLSTemplateElementType type;
  opaque data<0..2^32-1>;
} CTLSTemplateElement;

struct {
  CTLSTemplateElement elements<0..2^32-1>

> } CTLSTemplate;

Reviewer 2: I think that this needs some sort of unambiguous identifier, like a version number, that ensures that we can replace this.  Maybe that's included in the process for integrating that into the transcript (`ctls_template`), which is OK, but a system for replacing this scheme with a better one is very important to have, even if this turns out to be perfect the first time.

Author: OK, I added `CTLSTemplate.ctls_version` field.

~~~~

> TODO: Reorder enum.

> Elements in a `CTLSTemplate` MUST appear in strictly ascending order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Elements in a `CTLSTemplate` MUST appear sorted by the type field in ascending order.
```

Author: Done (but kept "strictly" due to uniqueness requirements).

The initial elements are defined in the subsections below.  Future elements can be
added via an IANA registry ({{template-keys}}).  When generating a
template, all elements are OPTIONAL
to include.  When processing a template, all elements are mandatory
to understand (but see discussion of `optional` in {{optional}}).

For ease of configuration, an equivalent JSON dictionary format is also defined.
It consists of a dictionary whose keys are the name of each element type (converted
from snake_case to camelCase), and whose values are a type-specific representation

> of the element intended to maximize legibility.

Reviewer: Is this change separable?

Author: I'm not sure what you mean.  I've put up #61 as an intermediate step that introduces the binary format without changing the transcript.

If you mean creating a version that doesn't define a JSON format at all: that is possible, but I didn't want to remove the JSON option without asking.  I have no strong preference on whether we define a JSON format.

~~~~JSON
{
  "profile": "0001020304050607",
  "version": 772,
  "cipherSuite": "TLS_AES_128_GCM_SHA256"
}
~~~~

### Initial template elements

> TODO: Reorder section.

#### `profile`

This element identifies the profile being defined.  Its binary value is:

~~~~
opaque ProfileID<1..2^8-1>
~~~~

This encodes the profile ID, if one is specified.  IDs whose
decoded length is 4 bytes or less are reserved (see {{reserved-profiles}}). When a
reserved value is used (including the default value), other keys MUST NOT appear
in the template, and a client MUST NOT accept the template unless it recognizes
the ID.

In JSON, the profile ID is represented as a hexadecimal-encoded string.

#### `version`

Value: a single `ProtocolVersion` ({{!RFC8446, Section 4.1.2}}) that both parties agree to use. For TLS 1.3, the `ProtocolVersion` is 0x0304.

When this element is included, the `supported_versions` extension

> is omitted from ClientHello.extensions, and the

Reviewer: Something missing here.

Author: Fixed, thanks.

In JSON, the version is represented as an integer (772 = 0x0304 for TLS 1.3).

#### `cipher_suite`

Value: a single `CipherSuite` ({{!RFC8446, Section 4.1.2}}) that both parties agree to use.

When this element is included, the `ClientHello.cipher_suites` and
`ServerHello.cipher_suite` fields are omitted.

In JSON, the cipher suite is represented using the "TLS_AEAD_HASH" syntax
defined in {{RFC8446, Section 8.4}}.

#### `dh_group`

Value: a single `NamedGroup` ({{!RFC8446, Section 4.2.7}}) to use for key establishment.

This is equivalent to a literal "supported_groups" extension
consisting solely of this group.

In JSON, the group is listed by the code point name in {{RFC8446, Section B.3.1.4}}
(e.g., x25519).

#### `signature_algorithm`

Value: a single `SignatureScheme` ({{!RFC8446, Section 4.2.3}}) to use for authentication.

This is equivalent to a literal
"signature_algorithms" extension consisting solely of this group.

In JSON, the
signature algorithm is listed by the code point name in {{RFC8446,
Section 4.2.3}}. (e.g., ecdsa_secp256r1_sha256).

#### `random`

Value: a single `uint8`.

The `ClientHello.Random` and `ServerHello.Random` values

> are truncated to the given length. Where a 32-bit `Random` is

Reviewer: 32 byte?

Author: Oops, yes.

"false".  All other values are forbidden.

If set to true, this element indicates that the client must authenticate with
a certificate by sending Certificate and a CertificateVerify message.
The server MUST omit the CertificateRequest message, as its contents
are redundant.

> OPEN ISSUE: We don't actually say that you can omit empty messages,
so we need to add that somewhere.

In JSON, this value is represented as `true` or `false`.

#### `client_hello_extensions`, `server_hello_extensions`, `encrypted_extensions`, and `cert_request_extensions`

Value: a single `CTLSExtensionTemplate` struct:

~~~~
struct {
  Extension predefined_extensions<0..2^16-1>;
  ExtensionType expected_extensions<0..2^16-1>;
  uint8 allow_additional;
} CTLSExtensionTemplate;
~~~~

The `predefined_extension` field indicates extensions that should be treated
as if they were included in the corresponding message.  This allows these
extensions to be omitted entirely.

The `expected_extensions` field indicates extensions that must be included
in the corresponding message, at the beginning of its `extensions` field.
This allows to omit sending the type for those extensions, as well as the

> length if it is fixed.  E

Reviewer: Something wrong here.

Author: Thanks, fixed.

}
~~~~~

Certificates are a major contributor to the size of a TLS handshake.  In order
to avoid this overhead when the parties to a handshake have already exchanged
certificates, a compression profile can specify a dictionary of "known

> certificates" that effectively acts as a compression dictionary on certificates.

Reviewer: I'm concerned about the implications of not reconstructing the transcript in this case.

Author: I'm reasonably confident that this is formally safe.  Interpretation of compressed certificates is driven exclusively by the template, which is in the transcript.

This arrangement is potentially more error-prone, as transcript->logical layer conversion is not verified by the handshake.

Reviewer: I'm persuaded.

For example, suppose that the cTLS template is:

~~~JSON
{
  "version": 772,
  "dh_group": "x25519",
  "client_hello_extensions": {
    "expected_extensions": ["key_share"],
    "allow_additional": false
  }
}
~~~

Then, the following structure:

~~~
   28                 // length(extensions)
   33 26              // extension_type = KeyShare
     0024             // length(client_shares)
       001d           // KeyShareEntry.group
       0020           // length(KeyShareEntry.key_exchange)
         a690...af948 // KeyShareEntry.key_exchange
~~~

is compressed down to:

~~~
   a690...af948 // KeyShareEntry.key_exchange
~~~

according to the following rationale:
:
* The length of the `key_exchange` is omitted because the "x25519" key share has a fixed size (32 bytes).
* `KeyShareEntry.group` is omitted because it is specified by `dh_group`
* The length of `client_shares` is omitted because the use of `dh_group` implies that
there can only be one `dh_group`.
* `extension_type` is omitted because it is specified by `expected_extensions`
* The length of `extensions` is omitted because `allow_additional` is false, the number of items in `extensions` (i.e., 1) is known in advance.

> The only exception to this rule is `ClientHello.profile_id`, which is processed before the profile is known.

Reviewer: How clever will one have to be to get this right?

Author: My goal here was mostly to capture a behavior that was implied by some examples but not described anywhere in the text.  I've attempted to make this rule more explicit, to avoid any tricky reasoning being required.

length of `2^16-1`.  When operating over UDP, large `CTLSHandshake` messages
will also require the use of IP fragmentation, which is sometimes
undesirable.  Operators can avoid these concerns by setting
`template.handshake_framing = 1`.

#### Retransmission

Like DTLS, Datagram cTLS requires a retransmission mechanism when operating over
a lossy transport.  When `handshake_framing` is true, Datagram cTLS uses the same
ACK and retransmission system as the corresponding version of DTLS.  However, when
`template.handshake_framing` is false, retransmissions work slightly differently:
:
* `ACK.sequence_number` is computed as the number of messages in the handshake
transcript since the last KeyUpdate, starting with the ClientHello at `sequence_number = 1`.
* Retransmissions do not increment the `sequence_number`.
* Each message type can only appear once from each sender in the handshake.  Recipients MUST ignore any duplicated messages.
* Messages within a flight are placed in canonical order by the recipient.

These rules are sufficient to ensure that the handshake terminates, and both parties
agree on the sequence of messages that are received, even if some records are

> dropped or duplicated by the network.

Reviewer: This is going to require some thinking on my part to be sure this works.

Author: I've dropped this entirely due to changes in the `handshakeFraming` PR.

### The Transcript layer

TLS and DTLS start the handshake with an empty transcript.  cTLS is different:
it starts the transcript with a "virtual message" of type `ctls_template`
containing the `CTLSTemplate` used for this connection.  This message is
included in the transcript even though it is not exchanged during connection
setup, in order to ensure that both parties are using the same template.

> Subsequent messages are appended to the transcript as usual.

Reviewer: We may have to consume a handshake type for this to ensure it's injective.

Author: Yes, that's in the IANA section.  I've attempted to make that clearer here.
